# Assignment 4 for R-Training Project

Programming is truly an art of manipulating and organizing expressions to achieve a certain goal within yet sometimes beyond the boundary of programming languages. Any high-level thought or idea can hardly be fully examined, not to speak developed, without a down-to-earth computational implementation in a reproducible way. Mastery of speaking in terms of expressions of programming languages actually helps you bridge the gap between worlds of different levels of abstraction.

## Basic Expressions

1. What is an expression? How many different types of expressions are there? What are they? Review some of the R code in your projects, which types of expressions are most frequently used? What roles do different types of expressions play in manipulating the state of the program and instructing the flow of the program?

2. How ambiguous could expressions possibly be to programmer and to the interpreter of the R language? Come up with several examples, try them in the R console, and guess how the R interpreter executes the expressions. For example, evaluate `1 < 2 < 3`, `(1 < 2) < 3`, and `1 < (2 < 3)`, and see whether they execute. If not, what is the error message? What does the error message mean? What does the message reveal about the details of the interpretation of this expression? In general, how do programming languages resolve ambiguity?

3. A scripting language often allows the user to evaluate any selected piece of code as he likes, but compiled languages generally does not. What are the major differences between these two programming models? What are the implications?

4. Try `ggplot2` and guess how the `+` operator on layers is implemented. Can you figure out other examples where non-primitive objects can be "composed" in some way and thus operator overloading can greatly simplifies notation?

## Functions

1. Read the following code and answer the question on the environment associated with functions.

```r
z <- 1
f <- function(x) {
    z <- 2
    g <- function(y) x + y + z
    return(g)
}
h <- f(1)
```

- What is the environment of `f`? What about `g` and `h`? Why and how do you tell?

- Evaluate `h(1)` and see the result. Explain how this result is carried out step by step in terms of variable look-up rules and scoping rules described in `R Language Definition`.

- What problems might this coding practice have? How do you avoid them especially in the case of huge and complex function body populated with variables inside and outside the function body?

2. Write an R program to analyze the R code of yours or of other people (for example, open source projects on Github written mainly in R), and answer the following questions:

- What libraries are most frequently used?

-What non-trivial functions are the most frequently used?

- How many lines do those R source files have on average?

- How many variables and functions are directly defined in the global environment as evidenced in those R source files, on average?

- Does these statistics suggest some sort of coding style that appears quite consistent for one but vary hugely among many?

## Advanced Topics

Calling a function in R is more expensive than that in C++. Write an R function that takes in an logical vector of arbitrary size and outputs its "signed counting representation". For example, take the logical vector `c(T,T,T,F,F,T,T)` as input, then the output will be `c(3,-2,2)`, where `3` means three consecutive `T` and `-2` two subsequent consecutive `F`, and so on. Measure how the computing time grows as the input vector grows using `microbenchmark`. Implement the same function in C++ via `Rcpp` or `Rcpp11` and make similar measurement. Compare the results. Try to understand the difference of overhead incurred when making function calls in the two different programming languages.
